Okay.
You've done this before, I presume, so-
Not for a while, but yes.
Yeah. We've all read the papers and stuff-
Yes
... so leave some time for questioning if you can. But thank you.
The floor is yours.
Thank you. Mōrena koutou. My name's Corin Seals.
I'm Associate Professor of Applied Linguistics and Associate Dean
of Research at Victoria University of Wellington.
Thanks for the opportunity to speak today.
Decades of research into language policy and planning has found evidence for
many things of interest to governments, and I will presently highlight two of
them for the members here today. First, there are two ways for a
language to have the status of official language.
The first is when it is a de jure official language explicitly
named as an official language by law.
The second is when the language is a de facto official language, wherein it is
the regularized practice to use that language in government business.
In Aotearoa, New Zealand, as you know, Te Reo Maori was named a de jure official
language in 1987, and New Zealand Sign Language in
2006. English has never needed to be named a de jure
official language of New Zealand because it is already the de facto
official language.
The other evidence-based finding from language policy and planning research that I
will highlight today is that there are functionally four reasons
why governments name a language as a de jure official language.
The first possible reason is when a country wishes to guarantee access to
resources in a particular language when that language is not
already a de facto language of the state.
For instance, English is an official language de jure in places such
as India, Namibia, Lesotho, Cameroon, et cetera.
The second possible reason is what we see when there are two powerful
world languages with significant speaker populations that are
spoken as de facto official languages.
This is what we see in Canada with both French and English.
Making the two official languages by law was a strategic political move
due to the high numbers of speakers of both.
However, it also diminishes recognition and protection for all of the other
minority languages in the country, including First Nations languages.
The third possible reason to name a language a de jure official language is to
protect a minority language and give speakers access to resources
to maintain the language, usually one that is vulnerable due to
language loss as a result of colonization and harmful language practices.
This is currently the case with Aotearoa, New Zealand, as well as Australia,
Wales, and now Scotland as of last year.
The final possible reason why a language would be named a de jure official
language is for political reasons that have nothing to do with speakers'
actual access and needs in the language.
This is when the de facto language of the state is made a de jure official
language. While the de jure status for minority languages is meant
to support them, a de facto language does not need this same
support because it is not in any sort of danger of being lost or of
being without resources. In this case, making a de facto official
language into a de jure official language enables the necessary
policy mechanisms to put further pressure on lesser spoken
languages and to put them at further risk.
This is what the Soviet Union did through their policies of Russification,
which hugely impacted many languages, including my own heritage language of
Ukrainian.
This is also what the US did under Donald Trump last year in an
act that has led to the reduction or elimination of over 2,000
language access provisions, which has functionally
blocked a huge segment of society from being able to access basic
resources for the minimum standard of living.
The English Language Bill is not a bill with little impact, as its length might
lead you to believe. Decades of research on language policy and planning around the
world proves exactly what reverberating impact it could and would have.
Thank you.
Right. I've got one question. Dr Sim.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you so much for coming.
Thank you.
I want to ask you a question from a linguistic perspective-
Yes, of course
... um, which is that when we are
seeing English being used as official language elsewhere, it never
explicitly mention what English.
Yes. That's right.
Um, and I wondered what sort of implications does that have in terms of
how people potentially apply different forms of English.
Do you know-- Have you looked into or done any research on that?
Yes. So thank you for the question.
There is a lot of unknown
implicit information in policies, such
as when a language is made official, like English.
It's usually said English, but what is meant is the
top standardized variety of English, which holds the most power.
And so that also further marginalizes other types of
English.
Yeah.
So yes, if that answers-
All right.
It does. Thank you for your submission this morning.
Thank you for making the time to come in person.
Thank you.
Thank you. All right.
Um, we'll go to, um...
I don't know.
Next one coming real soon. Okay, cool.
Good morning.
You just need to turn your camera on.
Hopefully, you can hear us.
Oh, good morning. Right. We've got five minutes with you.
Uh, we've got your papers. We've all read it.
Um, maybe just leave a little bit of time for a question. Okay. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today to my submission on the English
Language Bill. My name is Aaseon. I am a New Zealand citizen.
I support this bill and the proposal to recognize English as an official
language of New Zealand alongside Te Reo Maori and New Zealand Sign
Language.
I speak in support not only from theory alone, but from lived
experience.
I was born in Malaysia, raised in Switzerland, and later
chose to build my life in New ZealandAs a New Zealand citizen,
a mother, and an active member of my local community, I have seen
firsthand how shared language helps people from different backgrounds
communicate, integrate, and participate fully in society.
My support for this bill is based on three key points.
First, it reflects practical reality.
English is already the most commonly used language in New Zealand.
It is the language used most often in government, business,
education, law, and everyday communication.
Recognizing this in legislation simply aligns the law with how the country
already functions. Second,
it supports unity in a diverse society.
New Zealand is increasingly multicultural.
People from many backgrounds call this country home,
and English often serves as the common language that allows people to
communicate across cultures, work together, and participate in
civic life. A shared language helps a nation communicate
with itself.
Third, recognizing English as an official language does not
diminish te reo Māori.
Te reo Māori holds a unique place in New Zealand.
Its revitalization and protection should absolutely continue.
Recognizing English should be seen as complementary and not
competition. A confident nation can recognize both its
heritage and its present-day reality.
In my view, this bill creates a balanced and practical framework by
recognizing the languages that underpin communication in modern New
Zealand.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear, and I welcome any questions from the
committee.
Right, any questions? Right, Mr. Farris, did you want...? Yeah.
Kia ora. Kia ora. Yeah. Hi. Thank you for your submission.
Look, there's been a solid 50-odd years of effort
towards the revival and resurgence of te reo Māori,
and one of the things that's been key in it is having the
protections
given to te reo.
Now, the move to protect
or effectively protect the English language puts it
in direct competition again with te reo Māori.
Do you think that
that work that's been done over those 50 years to revitalize
te reo Māori might be in jeopardy? And given what
we've seen so far with the
reprioritization of names and things across government
and government ministries, do you think that that might be a concern for the
ongoing revitalization of te reo Māori?
I can't see how that would, one, diminish the other.
So I grew up in Switzerland, and as you may know or not know, we have four official
languages. One of those languages is Rhaeto-Romanic, which is
a very rare and old language that is spoken
mainly in a very tiny part in a few valleys.
Most people don't understand it, most people don't speak it, and yet it is
recognized as an official language, and it certainly does not diminish in
any form that French and German and Italian are also
official languages, and they do not compete as such.
All right. Hey, thank you very much for your submission.
Sorry we haven't got more time with you, but thank you this morning.
Yeah. Thank you very much.
Right. Now we've got Roxa Vote. Roxa Vote.
Can't come.
Oh.
Tanya.
Tanya? Okay.
She's standing in.
Right.
Good morning.
Tanya, are you there?
She needs to do her camera, that's it.
Can you turn your camera on, Tanya, please?
Oh, very good. Hey, nice to see you, Doctor. We've got five minutes with you.
We've read your paper.
Tamari e, papaki tu ana ngā tai ki te ringa.
Me whai whakaaro ki ngā hunga mate nānā nei i ngaro ki te pō i ngā
tai whinewhine o te hītori o te motu nei.
Kia tau tō rātou manaakitanga ki runga i a tātou hei ārahi i te ara
tika. E rere ana aku mihi ki te iwi Māori whānui e
manaaki ana i a tātou i te whenua nei.
Mai i te Taitokerau ki Pōneke i pōwhiritia ahau i te ao o te
hīkoi mō te Tiriti, otirā ka tukua aku mihi
aroha anō ki Ngāi Tahu whānui, inarā
ki Ngāi Tukauriri. Ko rata te mana whenua o tōku wāhi
noho. Ngā mihi maioha ki a koutou ngā mema o te komiti
whiriwhiri mō te āheinga nei. Ko wai ahau?
Nō Tiamana, nō Ingarangi, nō Wīwī ōku tipuna.
I tipu ake ahau ki Tiamana. Ko te reo Tiamana tōku
reo tuatahi. Ko te reo Ingarihi tōku reo tuarua.
Ko ia te reo o ōku tipuna ki te taha o tōku
whaea. Ko te reo Māori, hei koha ia nō te
tangata taketake o Aotearoa, hei whakarake mō tōku
arero, hei pari hau mō tōku ngākau, hei herenga a
wairua ki te whenua nei. Ko Dr. Tanya Schweim tōku ingoa.
Tēnā koutou.
Right.
I'm a German-
Oh, okay.
I am a-
Yep.
No, that's fine.
I am a German New Zealander with a PhD in English from the University of Canterbury
and a Cambridge Certificate in English Language Teaching to Adults.
I have taught English literature as a tutor at university and English language at
Polytechnic. My grandfather came from Worcestershire in England.
I have close English family living across the UK.
My daughters are native English speakers.
My love for the English language is evident and, as it were, certified.
And I am opposed to this bill. I recommend that it be
scrapped.
The government is not reading the room, and we see the bill for what it is.
It is a symbolic act to round off a raft of legislation under this
government that denigrates the mana of Māori and blatantly seeks to
eradicate a people, their culture, and their language.
This bill must be seen in that contextIt is not the
bureaucratic tidy-up exercise it pretends to be.
Because if it was, why introduce it now when we have bigger
issues to worry about? How much taxpayer money is wasted by
this process?
This bill is introduced by the Honorable Paul Goldsmith,
who had the gall to remove Māori greetings from official Matariki
invitations to foreign dignitaries.
That was an open show of contempt for te reo Māori.
The bill is a legislative sneer in that context, and in that
context it is harmful. We must consider the sheer
insensitivity of introducing this bill without so much as
acknowledging the survivors of generations who were beaten for speaking
Māori. The English language was weaponized to beat identity and
self-esteem out of little children.
Survivors, their children, and their grandchildren have had to work hard to return
to their reo. Thanks to them, te reo Māori is now thriving in parts of the
population. Others still have a road ahead of them.
How humbling for us tangata Tiriti to be invited to walk with them
in spite of everything that happened.
Some of those survivors are, in fact, my friends.
I am here for them to let them know that whatever the government of the Crown
is doing, they are not doing it in my name.
Any introduction of a bill giving English official status needs to be
in consultation with the Treaty partners, and with those who
have been harmed by the weaponization of the English language.
I don't see any of that happening here.
When you learn another language, to become good at it, you travel to the home
country of that language and immerse yourself.
That is how you achieve fluency.
Aotearoa, New Zealand, is the only country that is home to te reo Māori,
and yet we cannot truly immerse ourselves.
That is not normal.
As a learner, I have to look hard for opportunities to speak and
practice. We have to create immersive spaces, but the country
itself is still not an immersive environment for its own indigenous
language. This is the result of deliberate colonial oppression, racist
attitudes, and chronic underfunding.
In contrast, English needs no help.
What I am saying is, why this bill now?
Why is English being prioritized now through this
process? If this bill is to be a bureaucratic tidy-up, then
it can wait until such time that te reo Māori and New Zealand Sign
Language are as mainstream and respected as English is now,
as respected by all layers of society, even senior government
ministers such as the Honorable Paul Goldsmith and Winston
Peters.
Let's work towards a time when tangata whenua feel safe and respected
enough to perhaps invite us to have English as official language.
Now, that would be cause for celebration.
Until that time, if this government, tikanga kore, is not doing the right
thing, then we tangata Tiriti will, side by side with and
guided by tangata whenua. Te reo Māori will thrive on our tongues
and our hearts and in our children.
We will create the nation that Te Tiriti intended in spite of this
government. Tena koutou. E rere taku
manu ki runga i te hau o te tangi Tiriti.
Ko te rangi, ko te papa, ko te mihi e.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Tania. Sorry, we've run out of time, but thank you for joining
us this morning.
Thank you. Kia ora.
Right. We've got Anna Muir on the line, I see.
Good morning.
Oops.
Good morning. We've got five minutes with you.
Morena.
So I'm joining you from Auckland today.
I'm a fifth-generation Dunedinite of Scottish,
Danish, and Irish heritage.
I have had the benefit of listening to some oral submissions on the
2nd of April and this morning, so I thought it might be
helpful to refer to
Dean Knight's written and oral submissions.
In summary, I support his recommendation
for the English Language Bill to be redesigned
to enable amendments to the Constitution Act of
1986.
In paragraphs nine and 10 of his written submission,
he sets out some suggestions for the drafting.
So that approach would acknowledge the three
languages.
I think it's important that we
do not denigrate the two official
languages.
So that's really at the heart of my submission today.
As noted in my written submission, I think the purpose
statement in Clause 3 of the bill must be redesigned and
reworked so the purposes are more clearly
expressed.
I have some concerns about the use of the English
language in relation to the, I
guess, the drafting of this bill and its introduction to the House.
It has been highly controversial.
Frankly, I think the supporting information is inadequate,
so I'd encourage the committee to scrutinize the
Ministry of Justice's response to OIA
request number
131772.
In the official's advice, option two was their
preferred approach,
which was a model that would've
addressed all three languages in one place.
So it's surprising that that approach was not
presented to the House initially, and I think if that
had happened, we would have had a more even,
balancedI guess, review and scrutiny of this
so it could have been less political and more
genuinely focused on
how important it is that we take care and use the English language well in our
country.
In the past 18 months, I've had
lots of experiences involving Parliament and government
processes, ranging from being admitted to hospital for the first
time, buying my first home, which is a unit titled
property. I've supported somebody in a four-day family
court hearing, been involved with Auckland Plan Change 120
submissions. My property and transaction involved
people from overseas who did not speak English as their first language.
So
I think the English language or the New Zealand English, as
Michael Miller referred to in his submission, it's
integral to how we function every day as citizens
together, as well as with Parliament and government bodies.
Perhaps to
give more substance to the bill, I wonder whether it could
be redesigned to allow amendments for what the
Parliamentary Counsel Office calls maintenance legislation.
So in my written submission, I've proposed a simple amendment
which should not be contentious. Section 47 in the Unit
Titles Act of 2010 currently has what I would say is a
typographical error. Supplementary record sheet should
be expressed as the singular, because that is accurate and
that's what's consistent with usual legislative drafting protocols.
Right. Hey, thank you very much.
Have we got any questions for Anna?
Those are very specific recommendations, Anna, and
thank you for those. We have all read them, so we're
pretty aware of those. Thank you for joining us this morning.
Okay.
You were in Auckland, but you're from Dunedin.
Yes. I'm in Auckland, but I'm not an Aucklander.
I'm an Auckland Council ratepayer.
Yeah. I think we sort of heard that distinction.
Hey, thank you for joining us this morning.
Okay. Thank you. Bye.
All right. Hey, now I think we've got the Asian Aotearoa
projects.
Are you with us? Oh, good morning. How you going? Morning.
Good. Can you hear us?
Right.
We've got
five minutes with you. So we've all read your papers, but if you want to
encapsulate it, that'd be great.
Awesome. I'm just checking that you can hear us.
Yes, we can. We can.
Fantastic. Tena koutou. Ko Te Rarawa ko Ngātiwai
ngā iwi. Ko Kahurangi Rapira Davis ahau.
My name is Kahu, and I'm the Co-founder and Strategic Director of the Asian
Aotearoa Project.
Hello, committee members. It's lovely to be with you this morning.
My name is Lu Sehoo, and I'm the Executive Director of the Asian
Aotearoa Project.
And I am an Asian Aotearoa of Chinese descent, and I was born
in our beautiful country to immigrant parents, like so many of us
are.
So our organization is volunteer-run and advocates for the roughly
17% of Aotearoa's population who are of Asian descent.
We have a diverse 20-member advisory group, an online following over 12,000 New
Zealanders, and monthly engagement figures that regularly surpass 100,000 people.
We stand up for the many kids of Asian descent, Kiwi kids who grow
up hating themselves and feeling like they don't belong in this country
as a result of the bullying that targets them more than any other group,
according to a nationwide study released last year.
We stand up for the Kiwi kids of Indian descent, who just last week in
Papatoetoe turned to their school to find "Kill all Indians" spray painted in
red at the front entrance. If that makes you feel uncomfortable, it
should. That was six-year-olds who had to read that, targeted themselves and their
mums and dads.
We stand up for the Asian adults who have been spat at, verbally abused,
myself included, and physically assaulted in racially motivated attacks
on Auckland buses and in Auckland streets.
We stand up because we don't want another March 15 attack happening on our
shores. We don't want to just wait for it to happen and say, "Sorry.
We're shocked. We never could have predicted it."
Ultimately, the Asian Aotearoa Project's vision for our country's future is one
where everyone, regardless of where their ancestors came from, are treated
as truly equally belonging in this country.
And on this note, the English Language Bill couldn't have come at a worse
time for our country.
If you have read our submission, which you note that you have, and I thank you for
doing that,
you'll know the harm that this
seemingly innocent bill could do.
One-
Oh
... and marginalization of Aotearoa's Asian communities.
And three, is a step backwards for positive
patriotism and pride in our unique national identity.
Sorry.
As an Asian Aotearoa-
Can you just-- What was number one? We missed number one. We missed number one.
Yeah.
I'm sorry. No worries.
So if you've read our submission, you'll know that this bill has the real
ability to produce harm in our country.
So number one is it undermines Te Reo Māori's relative protections.
Okay. All right. Sorry. Carry on.
Yeah. And as an Asian Aotearoa, on note number two, I
can tell the committee now that we face constant comments that
question our belonging in our own country, especially to those of us where
we use a non-English language at home or have a non-native accent.
And these are the small comments that lead to bigger ideas that lead to
attacks like the 15th of March. So under the current structure,
people in my community, the 17% of Aotearoa, by the way, are able to
point to the law and use it as a useful defense of their belonging to this
great country. My parents who speak English as a second language but have lived
here for 30 years can say to the numerous people
who have made fun of their accent or language skills at work
that, well, English is not an official language, so this doesn't
make them any less of a New Zealander.
It's a point that my community takes pride in.
We love this about our country that it's so inclusive on paper.
The English Language Bill seeks to protect those who absolutely
don't need any protection while making those who are already vulnerable
seem even more foreign.
Right. I think-
We now welcome any questions.
All right, cool. Just got one from Mr Rosewood.
Thank you, Chair. What struck me about your submission was your opening
statement about those lived experiences of people,
and I'm just interested to hear more about that.
Can you explain how symbolic legislative
signals like this bill translate into other lived
experiences of exclusion or discrimination for
communities who already feel that they don't belong?
Yeah. Would you like to-
Would you like to take it or should I?
Yeah, up to you.
Yeah, absolutely. So, as we've outlined before, something we take pride in
in our country is the fact that we do not put one
foreign language above all others.
This provides, again, it's something that we can use both within our
community and take pride in internationally, I believe.
The fact that we recognize our native spoken language as the
thing that unites us all as New Zealanders, all as Aotearoans.
And everyone else, no matter if your family come from Britain,
come from China, come from Samoa, come from India.
You belong here equally in this country, and this bill starts to jeopardize that.
And we see this in a number of different ways.
We see
the political rhetoric of the day does empower people on the
ground level to say, "This is who belongs, this is who
doesn't belong." And the English Language Bill, again,
it pushes us down this road,
this redefining of--
I think our country, we
generally take pride in the fact we're inclusive.
We take pride in the fact that we don't see ourselves as a racist country.
When racist attacks
happen in New Zealand, we often say, "That's not us.
That's not who we are as New Zealanders."
When the message from the top is that actually we are
a Western Christian English-speaking country, which is
a sort of movement that we're starting to see across settler colonies
across the world,
we do see that align with more verbal attacks, more
physical attacks.
And because people feel like the government backs them up, that, "This is who we
are. Your language isn't who we are."
And, as I noted in my oral submission,
my parents have certainly used the current law as a defense at
work to say, "Actually, Maori and New Zealand Sign Language are the only two
official languages," when people are sort of making fun of their
accent or doing other things that are racist.
So this does point to the fact that legislation does
impact how people interact on the ground level, and can be either an attack, or
support an attack or support a defense.
All right. Hey, thank you to both of you for joining us this morning.
Very interesting submission.
Thank you.
And enjoy the rest of the day. Thank you.
Now, we're going to Mr Roger Stratford, I think. Is that right?
Good morning. Good morning.
Roger, I saw you up there before.
Yes.
Roger, can you just turn your camera on, please?
Roger, are you there?
Good morning.
You're on mute.
Yes, there we are, Roger. Thank you.
We've got five minutes with you.
I-
Good morning
... support the English Language Bill.
We need to understand what English is.
English was created in the 14th century
by
Chaucer.
England had been conquered by the Normans.
The language had been obliterated.
It had been retained only in the
vernacular.
French words filtered down.
Today in New Zealand,
our news media use Maori,
te reo Maori.
Those words will be filtered into English.
We already have kiwi and kia ora
as instances. They will become part of English.
Christianity came into New Zealand through English
as its medium. It's Christianity which has brought
individualism, liberalism, and created our
institutions of parliamentary democracy.
Our universities, our education,
all our laws and our courts have been brought, all those
principles of individualism and human rights have been brought to us by
Christianity through the medium of English.
A lot of submitters
complain
that English is not under threat. That's irrelevant whether
English is under threat.
Bills are not passed through Parliament simply because they're under threat.
Bills are passed under Parliament for all sorts of reasons.
Many of those submissions should be disregarded by this committee, I believe.
I act as a secretary for the local
residents and ratepayers associationI have
support for my views from the president of the Constitution Party,
Roma Warren.
I also believe my views are supported,
in general, by Elizabeth Rata.
If you go to YouTube, you'll see her speaking
to Peter Williams
in a clip on education, where a comment from
a member of the public
talks about
two grammar teachers on an Auckland bus, and her overhearing
those two teachers, and they couldn't speak English properly themselves.
Finally, I'd just like to say that I come from a
presupposition that Pākehā came to
Aotearoa New Zealand
to improve the country, not to harm the country.
Thank you very much. I'll
look forward to questions from the committee.
All right. Hey, thank you for that submission this morning.
Have we got any questions for Mr Stratford?
No?
All right. Well, it's good for the historical context for English language.
You're right, the Normans had a major impact, didn't they, from France?
Mm-hmm.
But thank you for your submission this morning.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Okay.
We're moving on
I think we're moving on, are we? Right, we're going back to
Mr Mark Stencil.
I see you were just asking. Are you there, Mr Stencil?
Kia ora.
Good morning. Good morning. Hey, we've got five minutes with you.
Okay. Kia ora. Tēnā koutou katoa. Ko Mark toku
ingoa. Ko Te Whiti ko te rangi. Ko Makara ko toku maunga.
Ko Rangitiko toku awa. Ko Ngāti Kahungunu toku iwi.
I'm Mark. I'm from Hawick, as they say.
I used to be there when I was a wee one.
And I'm here to speak to y'all this morning about how you're telling
us my alternative tongue is to be called English going
forward.
I think a muckle isle lacks a 40.
Let me stop talking in English, an old form of English from Northumbria.
So historically, the Kingdom of Northumbria was formed in the early
Anglo-Saxon period from Bernicia and Deira, and had a
language similar to the sound to the Mercian English found
south. These being basically the oldest forms of English we
know of. Only about 30% of this old language
exists now.
The earliest surviving substantial works of English literature were written
in Northumbrian. This includes the Cadmun Hymns, the oldest
surviving Old English poem. Before the Viking raids
destroyed many northern English libraries, Northumbria was the
cultural and intellectual heart of England.
This is the problem I have.
Moving through the Middle English period, the language changed to the south of
England, and many more words from many more languages were
introduced. The sounds changed, and eventually we have got to modern English,
the Mid-Atlantic accent, you may say, which is what you would call
English, Justice Committee. However, in the lowlands of
Scotland and in the northern regions of England, much of the early
Northumbrian language is still pronounced the same.
Basically, what I would call Scots and what you would call English are
the same language that has grown both together and independently.
In fact, old Scots was called Inglis.
The Oxford Dictionary was first edited by James Murray.
James Murray was a teacher from Dunham and was the youngest headmaster at
Hawick High School. Please note, the Oxford English Dictionary was
first edited by a Scot whose native language has some of
the deepest roots in our current common language.
But I'm not just here to speak about how I use language, so let's
turn to modern English and the modern Oxford Dictionary.
Modern English is made up of nearly every language.
Television, Greek. Court, judge, jury.
French, zeitgeist, kindergarten, German.
Ketchup, tea from China. Bungalows from Bengali.
Tikka masala from Glasgow as a recipe.
Volcano, crystal, boomerang, and Aotearoa has added kauri and
rark, as well as koha and whanau.
I'm sure you've heard all of this before, so what is the point?
The point is that we speak a common language which comes from nearly everywhere.
We all know this. We also know that we are not in
England. We are in New Zealand or Aotearoa.
Ironically, neither of these descriptions of our nation are in
English. They are Dutch and Te Reo respectively.
Anyhow, as we ramble, the reality is that we do speak a common
language, and this would be the term that best describes what we
speak to each other as New Zealanders on a day-to-day basis.
I would ask that the name of the bill is changed as extremely vague
around what is a de facto official language or what
English actually is. Given I'm able to speak Scots as a
de facto language, and it's commonly understood, it's a real
struggle to understand why the term English is being used to
describe the common language. That's me. Tidirasi, tidi on.
Hey, well, thank you very much. I've got a question from Dr. Sue Ng.
Cool. Thank you so much, Mark, and nice to see you in motion.
My question is around the interaction I think you mentioned before,
not in your submission, but in your email, around the interaction with this and the
Scottish language bill and the recognition of Gaelic and Scots.
I wonder if you want to elaborate on the implication of this particular
bill on what you mentioned before, and particularly in terms of its
interaction with the Scottish language bill.
My head count told me to say, "Can you pass another
two kilo mode?"
Basically, my standpoint is that Scots and English
are effectively the same language, and by-Make an
exclusively called the English Language Bill.
What you're doing is you're promoting a form of
colonialism. You're basically doing
damnatio in memoriae incarnate,
which is to get rid of culture. You're basically saying that the
colonial rule of England over Scotland means that the
language where it's common is no longer
relevant. It's not actually part of English is what you're saying.
You're saying, "My entire history, my entire culture, and my entire
past basically no longer exists
through semantics." You're using the term English to
describe a common language which effectively comes from everywhere,
including Scotland.
Thank you. Right. Hey, thank you for your submission this morning, and
good to have a Scot advocating for their language too.
Yes, from Northumbria.
And-
Can I add something?
Yeah.
I'm no longer Scottish.
I've got rid of my British passport.
Right.
Ooh.
I'm a New Zealander.
Okay, cool. That's very nice. Hey, thank you for your submission this morning.
Been brief.
Okay. Thank you.
Right.
We are going to be by Te Korowai.
Good morning.
Can you turn your camera on, please?
Morena. Very good to have you with us this morning, and nice that you've joined us.
Are you on your own?
Hi. Tēnā koutou. Morena.
Ko hau anahe i te wahi nei. Nō reira, tēnā
koutou katoa.
Good morning. We've got five minutes with you, so the floor is yours.
Kia ora. Ngā mihi mo tēnei wā kia kōrerohia
e pā ana ki te reo Ingarihi.
My basic stance is that English belongs in
England,
and the other places where it has originated from.
Given the korero of the previous speaker, which I
appreciate there are many versions of English,
I do not advocate for this bill. I believe it should be scrapped.
The speakers prior to me speaking of
linguistic
issues and the colonization issue, I
agree with.
This
bill to me is a further colonization of our people
and our language as indigenous people of Aotearoa, and I am
completely against it.
I just want to finish with a waiata before
I give time for questioning.
And this was written by Karepehi Opa for the Kohanga Reo in
Mangataipa, Mangamuka
many, many years ago, and it basically speaks of our love for our reo.
Now, before I sing it actually, I recall
a korero was spoken to me
by whanau from Orauta, the heart of Ngati Hine,
where children were struck
with a cane on the head
when they did not pronounce English properly. So they were given a book.
The children were between the age of eight and 11,
and they were given a book to read, stand in a line, and
the teacher would move along the line, and if you made
an error, you would be struck on the head.
And one young
boy was struck on the head three times, and then
he went unconscious, and his young brother
ran to his father to come down and intervene.
And the father said,
"If you do this again to any of my children and any of these
children, I'll be back."
And it didn't happen again. But this
bill feels like that strike,
that the government will continue to strike us until our
language is nullified
by bills such as this. So I'm completely against it, and I just
wish to sing this short waiata too, which encapsulates our love for te
reo.
I
took
her on
Wi-Fi.
Are
you there? Can you hear us, Morena?
Mm.
Is it totally frozen?
Yeah. That's it. She's gone.
Sure.
Yes.
Welcome to Northland Wi-Fi.
Okay, that's a shame.
All right. Are you going to try and reconnect or?
She isn't going to get back on. We'll go to the next one.
Yeah, okay. Let's go to the next one, and we'll come back. Is that Mr.
Michael Miller?
Yeah.
Oh, please come to the front.
We're hoping you're going to sing a waiata.
I do sing, but I won't sing today.
Okay, cool. We've got five minutes, so just a
little bit of a tough question. Thank you.
Tēnā koutou katoa. My name is Michael Miller.
I'm a PhD candidate down the road at Victoria University, and
my research is on mathematically modeling language revitalization.
I want to be clear upfront I-- Oh, sorry
Oh, no, no, no.
Okay.
I want to be clear upfront, I oppose the bill in its current form.
But my opposition is constructive, and there is a version of this
bill that I
could support, and I will explain.
But let me start by saying something that I think most New Zealanders would agree
with. New Zealand English is its own thing.
When we go to the beach, we put on our togs and
jandals. We don't put on swimsuits or flip-flops, and not bathers or
thongs. We stop at the dairy on our way home, not the corner
shop. We call a plot of land a section, and we call the green
fruit a kiwifruit, not a kiwi, which is used elsewhere
overseas.
And a kiwi means something quite different to us.
And our everyday English also includes words that are adopted from
te reo Māori, like whānau, iwi, kia ora, which have become standard
in New Zealand English.
Mm-hmm.
That unique vocabulary reflects who we are, where we live,
and the language that has shaped us.
This unique vocabulary deserves recognition and protection.
But here's the problem: the bill in its current form does not do that.
The bill refers to the English language with no definition,
no indication on which English is meant.
Not New Zealand English, it just says the English language.
This matters legally. The Legislation Act of 2019
says words in legislation carry their natural or
ordinary meanings, but ordinary meaning is variety
dependent.
The ordinary meaning of the term flat in Wellington is not the same
as the ordinary meaning of the term flat in London.
Similar with the term section.
And if the English language is ever used as an interpretive
reference point, a court could theoretically look at British or
American sources that don't reflect the usage in New
Zealand. This isn't just a legal concern.
New Zealand English is under pressure right now.
The internet is overwhelmingly American.
Autocorrect, voice recognition, social media, AI chatbots
all default to American English. And as a result,
several distinctly New Zealand words and phrases are slowly being lost and
replaced by American equivalents,
in speech, especially in our younger generations.
Mm-hmm.
And this is something that's recognized by linguists and by teachers, and I
witnessed it firsthand as a teacher in the classroom for many years.
If there is a case for legislating and recognizing
English in New Zealand, it is this: to protect the New
Zealand local variety that is genuinely at risk of being
flattened by American English online.
The fix is simple. Replace all instances of the English
language with New Zealand English throughout the bill,
and add a definitions clause that anchors and
defines our variety of English that is spoken here in New
Zealand.
In my view, this would make the bill worth passing.
But also, te reo Māori and New Zealand Sign Language were given official
status through legislation designed specifically to
protect them, languages that have been actively suppressed and
marginalized. This bill,
as it currently exists, grants the same status to
English without explaining why.
The assurance that te reo Māori and New Zealand Sign Language won't be
affected is only in the explanatory notes and not in the
contents of the bill.
And that means the assurance doesn't really have any legal force.
A bill that recognized New Zealand English is not
positioning itself against the other official languages.
New Zealand English includes words such as whānau,
iwi, kaitiakitanga in its standard vocabulary
and is not in competition with te reo Māori.
It's in partnership with it.
So I'm not asking the committee to scrap the bill.
I'm asking the committee to improve the bill, specifically by
recognizing New Zealand English as something worth protecting,
and also to move the assurance about the status
and use of te reo Māori and New Zealand Sign Language
into the contents of this bill, not just in this explanatory notes.
Thank you.
Okay, I've got one question for Mr. Bates.
All right.
Thank you very much. Thanks for the constructive submission.
Mm-hmm.
You refer to the definition of New Zealand English, but
unless I missed it, didn't propose what a definition would be.
Wondering if you had any thoughts on-
Um
... what that could say.
My ideas, yeah, I didn't write this down,
but my ideas would be you talk about
the language that is spoken in New Zealand, including the
vocabulary-
Mm-hmm
... yeah, that we use in New Zealand.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Yeah. That's a difficult bit, though.
That's a drafting issue.
Yes.
We understand the contents-
Yeah
... but I thank
that's the issue. Right. Now, thank you for your submission.
You're welcome.
Members, we're going to go back to Rhonda,
who's ... Rhonda, are you with us again?
And I'm going to go to Mr. Farris.
Yeah. Option.
Rhonda, are you there with-
Is she still there or has she gone?
Do you think she's gone?
She's gone. She's just taking a while.
Rhonda, if you're there, please join us.
Sounds like a sales.
You're
present?
No.
Okay. Rhonda, if you can hear me, can you please
rejoin us? We're ready for you again
It's like playoffs.
Yeah.
Would it help if-
I can-
If that woman had the screen on?
Is she there?
Should we move on?
No cameras. That's what I meant, yeah. She's coming through now.
Rhonda?
Just one
minute.
Rhonda, are you there?
Oh, good morning.
Kia ora.
Hey, lovely to hear you. Yeah, we missed your lovely waiata, but we're running
out of time. But I've got a question for you from
Mr. Farris.
Tena koe, Rhonda. Tena koe, your kōrero mō te
akemi ki ngā kōhanga reo. A lot of the
revitalization work over a long period of time, particularly from Te Tai
Tokerau all the way down, has been to build, to
revitalize Te Reo Māori specifically for our mokopuna in the
kōhanga reo movement. What
signal do you see this bill
giving to the kōhanga reo generation of today?
Well, to the kōhanga reo and the kura kaupapa and
Māori in general, this basically says that
the English language has moved in on our territory
yet again, where we are struggling to revive the
reo still, even with the kōhanga reo movement.
This bill actually undermines Te Reo Māori in many
ways that previous speakers have referred to, where
we won't see this in open forums, but it will
attack the funding, the resourcing of
kōhanga reo, kura, and
Te Reo Māori in general.
Okay. Hey, thank you.
Mōrewa.
Hey, sorry we missed your waiata because that was beautiful, but unfortunately,
the screen just froze. But hey, thank you for joining us this morning and coming
back with us. Cheers.
Kia ora.
Thank you.
Thank you for hearing and your question.
Right, everyone, we're finished.
I'm-